[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of neon
today.com I'm your host Dylan Grabowski
in this episode we were joined by Fabian
Gump the CEO of the web 3 Foundation an
entity that nurtures and stewards
Technologies and applications in the
fields of decentralized web software
protocols with a primary focus on the
polka dot ecosystem in this episode we
spoke about polka dots early days
applicable and less applicable uses for
blockchain Technologies the similarities
between polka dots white paper and the
ethereum L2 landscape today the recent
uproar about the ecosystems treasury
spending and so much more just a
reminder nothing said on this podcast is
a solicitation to buy or sell any tokens
that the host or guest May hold tokens
discussed in any given episode you can
check out a disclaimer on the Neo news
today web page to learn more also if you
appreciated this episode please like
subscribe and comment on your favorite
podcasting platform every like comment
and subscription really helps us get
these episodes in front of more ears and
eyes with all that said I really enjoyed
this conversation with Fabian and I hope
you enjoy it too today we're joined by
Fabian gum the CEO of the web3
foundation an entity that is dedicated
to building an internet where users are
in control of their own data identity
and Destiny Fabian how you doing today
yeah doing well thanks thanks for having
me I um we had a blast chatting a little
bit before we hit the record button and
um it's clear that you're obviously
steeped in blockchain and web through
you've been here for years but to jump
into the conversation I just have to
know because I took a different path
into Computer Sciences crypto um so how
does someone with a master's degree in
Philosophy from Oxford end up in crypto
yeah that's a that's a good question so
uh you stand your research I can tell um
yeah so so I have a a bachelor's degree
uh in in electrical engineering so uh
there was more you know previous
epidemic uh uh joury was a little bit
closer to all of this this actually
coincides
uh with s of like Bitcoin first hitting
my radar I think was at my first first
un semester this was like 2012 or so 12
um and uh you know I had people around
me that were much more into it like they
were you know what could you do at the
time I mean you could trade you could
maybe mine but and and then was at some
point all of these Bitcoin folks started
to like pop up and you could maybe sort
of like you know what are me coins today
kind of were Bitcoin F at the time um
but it wasn't really much for me to do
uh at least I didn't feel like there was
much to for me to do uh so it wasn't
until 200 16 or so when I I graduated I
uh was stuck in a in a in a boring
German automotive sort of like Rd job
and um you know if if I got you right
there in know intro conversation maybe
similar to you uh was looking for
something that's more Dynamic that's
more interesting that's more fast-paced
uh and and uh yeah through a mutual
friend got introduced to a bunch of
people um in the ethereum ecosystem so
ethereum uh especially the developer
group around eum was very present in
Berlin at the time I moved to Berlin uh
I got to know gas who was one of the
co-founders and then so the original CTO
of of eum I also like cord devs and
there was a new organization that that
just got started uh at the time called
escore and then eventually rebranded to
parody Technologies
and uh yeah we were mostly focused on
building um a an implementation of the
ethereum protocol it's now called open
etherium it's still out there it's not
maintained anymore by by parody but uh
yeah you know a certain point in time we
were powering a big chunk of the network
through to R implementation um and at
some point in 2017 we sort of like yeah
we had the feeling like we there's
enough product ideas here in our head or
protocol ideas that we don't just want
to keep implementing you know the spec
of theum protocol but we would love to
like design protocols ourselves andol
them ourselves um and this is how how s
of like polka dot slowly came to be so
you know I'm not a co-founder of parody
but I'm I'm sort of like there uh in
polka dot from from day Zero as it came
out of that organization and then
eventually sort of like unfolded um uh
yeah I think that's my that's sort my
path into uh into crypto I guess and
then you know I spent six seven years at
at at parody left for uh in 2021 uh
which is a very hot time for polka dot I
I left was out for about one and a half
years and then I first joined the uh the
supervisory board and then joined the
foundation as the CEO uh at the end of
this year so at the end of last year uh
so that's my journey into crypto and my
journey through through polka dot if you
want yeah that's awesome um I I only
asked because in undergrad I took I
accidentally took a level 400 philosophy
course because I thought I was
interested in in the subject matter and
um Martin heiger is being in time
effectively pushed me away from ever
wanting to delve further into philosophy
yeah yeah yeah that's uh so so my My
Philosophy journey is really more of one
of like academic Pastime hobby kind of
thing but uh yeah if you uh encounter
the wrong philosopher at the wrong time
in your journey into this field uh you
maybe hard for you it's this uh it's not
you have to approach the whole thing the
right way uh definitely uh but yeah
that's also interesting overlaps uh for
me now like I spend a good amount of
time on like moral philosophy and ethics
and so on and you know everything that
is like my work is like Science and Tech
and research and business right it's all
the question of like what can we do
right like what what
is possible against the physical world
but also what is what can we Forge doing
sort of like on aition side and and and
you know the other side is more like
what should we do right like okay we can
we can we now know what we can do we're
pretty good at figuring out what we can
do but like what out of those things uh
are actually desirable in States so uh
it's a good combination for me uh you
know dabbling and philosophy and and
doing the work I do yeah I appreciate
that dichotomy of focusing on the very
engineering side of you know here the
parameters we we have to operate in and
here's what we can do but then also the
kind of uh like more ethereal like
larger scale you know where's the puck
going what can we do not just what can
we do with the tech but like what can we
do with the ideology that this Tech
enables and and the freedoms that it
opens up and so I guess maybe as you've
been um the VP of ecosystem development
at parody and now you're the CEO of the
web 3 Foundation over the years how have
this these pulls and pushes in different
directions of being Tech focused and
then also being um kind of idea focused
how have you noticed the changes as
you've progressed through the blockchain
space since 2016 yeah yeah that's an
interesting question so I think uh it
definitely has changed I mean even just
what we call like you know there are
different sections of blockchain
ideology within the broader blockchain
industry if you want to call it that at
this point and if you look at sort of
like what was there at the very
beginning sort of like the core Bitcoin
sort of what philosophy uh that was much
more cyber Punky and and and and sort of
like you know against establishment to
uh say like I don't know like the let's
say the first defi summer right where or
like the NF Grace that sort of like
followed shortly after which was clearly
a very different sort of like weet three
blockchain philosophy and world right
and um uh there's certainly technical
things that have changed that I think
allowed uh this philosophical change I
don't think it was necessarily that much
the other way around uh like because the
of gave gave us a general purpose sort
of
like environment to play with and
allowed for like you know the easy
deployment of nfts and decent we
exchanges and so on then you know that
opportunity attracted people who are
interested in the in that kind of uh
those kind of solutions and um you know
I think uh certainly traditionally I say
we I mean like the polka do ecosystem
but also certainly the foundation as
organization come more from this like
cyber Punky world right that's certainly
where lot of like the the early early
poker de days came out as like post
Snowden world and and and and sort of
like all of that was like very present
um that being said right like there is
uh all kinds of use cases now that we've
uncovered uh on blockchain uh that you
know may still be you know true to that
you know initial idea somewhere right
but like our uh uh you know one step two
steps remov um but if you look at sort
of like the technical designs that we've
done in polka do the way we approach
community building and all of that is is
is still much more True to this original
Cy Punky kind of kind of vision uh than
it is the case with um uh you know many
many of the of the people who built
Solutions maybe in the similar category
as as we did and like I got my I bought
my first Bitcoin ethereum and Litecoin
in summer of 2017 and that would just
three years later there was defi summer
and then a few months later The nft
Craze I couldn't have predicted that
these were going to be the things that
onboarded the masses uh well maybe def5
was more crypto native but the nfts
certainly were were bringing in the non
crypto natives the non web3 users kind
of similar to maybe what we've seen with
like The Craze in celeb coins and meme
coins this cycle but I'm curious from
like a foundation's perspective how do
you kind of um keep this into
consideration do you just build out the
infrastructure and just assume the
market will figure out a way for to to
use these Technologies or can you kind
of maybe get a finger on the pulse and
get a sense that uh maybe in two or
three years there could be something
like a defi summer there could be
something like an nft craze or there
could be something like whatever we're
not thinking about right now yeah yeah
that's I think that's a that's
it's it's it's a question that probably
anyone who builds sort of like generic
platforms ultimately and like struggles
with right like how opinionated do you
want to go in and maybe you know make it
really good for like a specific use case
but then lose a bunch of other use cases
and on on the path there it's sort of
like the Swiss army knife right is like
can do all kinds of stuff but like it's
not really good at anything I mean if
you really a professional chef doesn't
use it professional handyman doesn't use
it right so you could really build Swiss
uh the kitchen knife but then you don't
have a screwdriver on the back of it
right and so this is a little bit the
issue you have with these platforms is
like uh how opinion do you want to go
and to what extent can you even predict
the future I think there's certain way
specific ways of approaching it but
certainly one way that um we take in
polka do and that I think is also you
know to some ex validated in the history
of Technology uh Innovation is there's
certain things that no matter the use
case people will want right uh so um
what's a good historical examp so for
example you'll hear someone like Jeff
Bas St if you look at like old investor
letters writ or old interviews you will
speak a lot about you know we want to
sell everything on Amazon right like we
don't really care what what's being F we
don't want to have an opinion on that
there's certain things that everyone
will care about you want the stuff to be
as fast on your doorfront as possible
you want it as cheap as possible you
want to have as big of a selection as
possible you want things to be high
quality right you can still optimize for
certain things that you think are at
least amongst most of those categories
they're probably going to be relevant
right and so like a blockchain OFA you
probably want things to be as scalable
as possible no one wants to hit
scalability limits when the application
actually goes to the rule no one wants
to pay Crea fees everyone wants to think
to be fast and performant and E you know
like those are things that are true no
matter or the use case um so those
things you should definitely be focusing
on and like so like first thing and then
I do think you can have uh you know you
can catch some waves and you can support
certain Trends if you see them shaping
out and like I think for example def5 is
a good is a good use case because the
you know ultimately we're talking about
sort of like
permissionless um systems and most of
the permissioning in those systems comes
through economic permissioning right
it's like you stake something or you
lock something up or you pay for
something and then you get a certain
ride um and sort of like in the absence
of civil resistance and real Identity On
These Chains I think the you know defi
in the sense of like stable coins and
liquidity on those and dexes where you
can swap these tokens back and forth and
so it's always going to be relevant
right where a lot of these like more
complicated Ed and people will actually
buy housings with a loan on sh I don't
know right we can maybe maybe not but
but like the fact that they have to be
able to swap tokens within your economy
and and be able to move them around and
uh that they will probably have want to
have something that's stable against the
real economy it's Point those are things
that are I think obviously useful for
the kinds of systems that we're trying
to build and and so you know we focus on
making them good in our platform yeah I
appreciate that and I know that um we'll
Zoom back out and and chat at the at the
web 3 Foundation level but I just want
to keep um the finger on the pulse for
your time at parody and so for maybe
someone who's listening to the podcast
because this is kind of protocol
agnostic uh we talk to anyone and
everyone building on blockchain so we
might not necessarily have someone who's
steeped in the polka dot kusama
ecosystem can you just share a little
bit about what the focus of parody is
and its relationship to the polka dot
chain and ecosystem and maybe also kind
of in that vein talk about like the
levels of support you provided for polka
dot was it purely infrastructure or was
it also like onboarding daps and Dev
teams and things of this nature yeah
totally so this is also uh changed a
little bit so it's definitely even even
for people who've maybe been following
polka do quite closly for a while but
haven't for the last year or so um I
think there's something interesting here
um so uh you know there there polka dot
there's what three Foundation do parody
polka dots uh there probably a long
version short version but essentially
it's it's it's a network uh blockchain
network uh and we can dive into sort of
like you know how it looks like but it's
not PO is not an entity polka do is uh
you know it's a piece of technology in a
community around um then is uh parody
which is uh used to be like I said so
like prior to so like you should go back
a year one and a half years ago really
the main driver behind the success of
polka do uh it would do marketing for
polka do ecosyst development for pokka
do it would build the core technology
polka do tools developer relations and
so on right and then there webt
Foundation uh which develops the the uh
education the uh more fundamental
research and a lot the funding um now
we're now moving in polka dot more and
more into a world where we don't just
have these like two core organizations
and a lot of people that build on the
network but rather it's a it's it's
really a network of core organizations
that are pushing polka do forward so
there's organizations much more focused
on ecosystem development organizations
much more focused on events and and
Community Building uh you know Venture
Studio it's like there's there's a lot
of like polka dot exclusive polka dot
focused organizations that have S like
spun up um and it's driven by a very
dedicated strategy of the foundation to
do so to also fun and support these
teams that allows people to get all
kinds of support right whether that is
uh you know technical support funding
support uh marketing support uh uh those
things are all available and they're
available uh you know not just from from
one or two organizations but in know
from really a pretty broad set of of
themes so you mentioned when you were
kind of giving the your CV or your
resume for for how you end up in the
space you mentioned that you left the
you left parody in 2021 and that polka
dot was kind of experiencing a moment of
like Market success and I view polka dot
as sort of one of the first modular
chains that kind of popped up in into
like the the Forefront of the token
holders and the develop the app
developers and dap developers um because
there is this single chain that
maintains estate and then there are
these par of chain that can compete in
order to communicate with that single
chain and at the same time in 2021 we
also saw kind of a market attention
towards another modular thesis in Cosmos
and you fast forward to today in 2024
and it seems like there's a very strong
monolithic Focus um if we're using the
market as a sort of metric uh salana is
kind of like the hot chain and we've
also to a certain extent seen this modul
it thesis play out with ethereum with
all the l2s that are built on top of it
so where do you think this kind of like
modular monolithic narrative is sort of
going is it just a a kind of moment in
time where people just kind of like want
to buy soul because there's meme coins
on that chain or do you think we're kind
of at a crisis moment for uh modularity
and for for chains that are trying to
build uh ecosystems of blockchain that
communicate with a singular blockchain
yeah good question I think so first of
all right like if you if you go back to
sort of like when the cosmos paper or
the polka dot paper uh were put out
there uh this was a pretty radical idea
right the idea of um uh spinning up you
know a bunch of chains and then having
them sort of like communicate in some
some uh shape or form and making it as
easy as possible to build blockchains in
the first place so putting framewor on
that um uh and then you know there's
obviously sort design sols that have
been made uh different design have been
made compared to you know the future
Road m e or the future Ro M of col or
polka dot but if you look at um you know
the polka the initial polka paper and
you look at eum today with with its l2s
there's there's actually a lot of
similarity right I think we've all got
of like inspired by Jor and certainly
there's like like um this idea of you
know what's like modularity narrative
you has has taken hold right compared to
what it was once what it once was sort
of like a you know a radical idea and
you see that say you know you can go for
the right like like Avalanche subnets
and and and cordano with their push now
actually using the pol. SD in the
background and so on so right so there's
um there's still a very broad push in
that direction um but you know that that
strategy does not come from
right that strategy comes at a cost and
I think you know what we tried to do in
polka dot is anticipate a lot of those
costs early on and you sort of work
against them right like think about how
how should the base layer token function
in a uh in in a world like this right
like what's what's sensible in economic
model for a world like this I think you
know now this a question mark like
what's how does it look for Eve how does
look for Adam and so on right um but we
tried to put quite a bit of thought that
how does how does communication between
those different chains actually work
like it's great you can spin all of them
up but if they didn't off for Sil uh you
know that's you're not really getting
getting much F and you know you could go
on on and on like this and it's not like
we have all of these things figured out
red but I do think we've managed to get
a little bit of a Hab start on some of
these things because for us it was like
oh we want to build a coher system H
versus eth was sort of like oh we're
going to do east2 and then oh well
actually L2 is like it was more emerging
right um uh and therefore uh you know
some of these things W maybe quite as
anticipated uh but yeah I think you know
Jan if anything and and you know we can
talk about future iterations of polka
dot it might probably make sense to go a
little bit uh through this but there's
sort of like this future longer term
vision for for polka dot and especially
the the base layer of polka dot that you
know if anything takes uh at least in
terms of what it will provide in terms
of functionality takes one step into the
direction of more monolitic chains uh
because we do recognize that having a
coherent Global state or at least semi
coherent Global State across all of
these applications actually comes with a
lot of benefits right and so uh we think
a lot about when we think about the
future iterations of of polka dot and
this is so we're talking about like one
year two years little of like from from
now on and not not get delivered this
year is sort of like everything I would
say it's future future durations um uh
you know those kind of design decisions
actually start playing a role for us
because uh uh we that there there's also
some some value into having uh you know
take like etherum main that right like
having essentially everything run on on
a on a global coherent State um yeah so
the question is can you have something
uh s like a best of through World kind
of approach and and I think you can yeah
and so maybe from maybe this is a
difficult question because the
foundation is tasked with spearheading
the the growth and the marketing of the
ecosystem but what are the levels of
conversations you're having with like
enter prise grade clients or
institutions um maybe maybe Banks maybe
and I'm this is only front of mine
because we've seen the launch of the
Bitcoin and and ethereum ETFs this year
so there's a whole new class of
interested investors and users and so
I'm curious like have there been
conversations with Enterprise grade um
entities clients um institutions and if
so uh a what have these conversations
been like and B do they Al kind of shape
the future of of polka dot and and
kusama and the way that you and your
team Envision building out these
blockchain networks yeah for sure I mean
I think we have to uh take a little bit
apart what we mean by look like
Enterprise players I think there is um
uh so there's people who could Deploy on
the network right and we' seen uh waves
of Enterprise Interest come and go I
think the first time we really saw
Enterprise interest uh was some like the
ethereum Enterprise ethereum Alliance uh
stred by consensus in 2017 I think it's
the first time like really we had like
oh like big sparma might be interested
or like shipping containers on the
blockchain whatever you know like that
kind of conversation and it was mostly
driven by you know both maybe a feel of
missing out from these organizations of
like you know big new hype but then also
like Innovation departments that had
some money to spend but like not there
wasn't really a big focus on on on
really getting some on chain and if
we're really honest the technology would
have probably also not been ready to do
so um and so uh uh you know those and
we've we've seen sort of like in in
different sub areas sub vertical of
blockchain I think we have seen like
come we've seen things come and go so in
that world I think it's really important
it that you
are timing matters alone right H if you
talk to the wrong kind of person at the
wrong kind of time you can waste a ton
of uh a ton of resources so what we what
we see uh in polka dot happening and I
don't even know if I would call these
like Enterprise customers but they're
just larger organizations that have
already have significant user bases that
migrate over so we've seen just last
week we've seen uh mical games uh Deploy
on polka dot um uh that you know some of
the highest ranking sort of like
applications on the Apple App Store like
like games on the Apple App Store and
like trading cards and so on and like
they're not native to polka dot as when
they didn't start as a polka dot
starduck right they uh but they they
found polka do technology to be useful
to try to do then they bring you know
hords of users off with the network
which is in our interest right uh and so
uh these kind of deals like very forward
looking but maybe larger organizations
that that that already has you know
distribution I think are very
interesting um to what extent like a
bank is going to you know actually build
an application on polka dot I think you
know in the like adoption cycle you know
Banks government like all of these like
very highly regulated organizations are
going to be pretty late to the game and
I don't think we're we're there yet I
think there's a different elements here
which you refer to was like ETFs right
or like to what extent can we integrate
those assets into the traditional bicis
and and there we've obviously seen quite
a bit of movement in the last in the LA
in the last year or so uh with the
Bitcoin ETF and now the E ETF um I think
uh in business we are being approached
like those are conversations that that
are that are happening and I think s of
work anyone with enough volume and
market cap in the top 20 is is being
approached of our conversations like
that I think the question is to what
extent is the interest on the outside
right there's all kind of like
Regulatory and legal and so on matters
that need to be clarified and you have
to have a certain Market maturity and
and all of that uh but ultimately you
also have to have clients that are
actually interested in this asset and I
think we have a very strong power law
distribution around this stuff right now
you know Bitcoin clearly there interest
eth some interest probably otherwise
wouldn't have happened but like you know
I think the
the it drops off pretty shortly from
there um now that doesn't mean that
won't change right uh but uh yeah to me
that's a different game than you know
bringing some banking consultum onto a
blockchain I think that's that we
probably H out from from seeing
something that happen Yeah you mentioned
mythical gaming and um I remember from
the kind of like 2021 hype cycle like
web 3 games where one of the darling
verticals and um it just always seemed
to me that gaming and blockchain had
kind of a perfect match um I mean even
like vitalic was inspired to build
ethereum because he lost the World of
Warcraft in game item so um are we there
yet for like big AAA gaming Studios to
integrate uh blockchain Solutions into
their into their game design uh the game
Tech stack are or are we still like a
couple Cycles away from that yeah um so
what I think we're definitely seeing is
like interesting use cases in in certain
areas from players that you know uh
maybe that's not a Ubisoft right but
from players that are significant in
that in the gaming industry for sure um
I think we're also you know it's gaming
but I think there's maybe a bit of a
broader category here around
entertainment uh uh is maybe the
broadest category I could come up with
but we see quite a bit of ity on polka
dot like um we have quite a quite a few
things in pokka happening around music
and events uh because you have a lot of
like you know similar aspects of like
fan loyalty and you know mechanisms like
that going on and so I think if we see
certain mechanisms working gaming
there's going to be related fields but
they're probably also applicable it's
it's it's at least that's what we're
sort of like seeing seeing emerging in
the PO ecosystem and they'll broadly in
the category of entertainment uh but I
don't know you know is the next I don't
know iteration of World of Warcraft are
you going to be able to like you know
throw your sword on a DEX and trade it
for some we'll probably still FG out on
that but like really web free native
gaming uh that that manages to attract
significant amounts of users not just
because you paid him a ton of money in
your own token but actually because the
people love playing the game and and and
love being able to trade it and love
being able to take it some World um uh I
think it's very much rizing yeah I I
also think that entertainment is just a
fantastic kind of Realm for um web 3 you
know uh Red Rocks is kind of a major
venue here in Colorado um back in the
day it's kind of like a show at Red
Rocks is kind of what propelled you too
to become uh kind of famous and the last
time I was at a Red Rock show uh there
was an artist that was trying to give
away like a specific mixtape that they
were only delivering to folks who were
at that show and to me this was a
perfect kind of moment for web 3 you can
use your digital ticket that's
represented as an nft in order to claim
this specific MP3 that the artist was
trying to give to people who were at
that event only but I realized that the
sort of onboarding experience is still
too abstract for the normal person they
don't want to download a wallet they
don't want to preload it with gas they
don't want to learn about storing a priv
private seed uh for their for their keys
they don't want to learn about any of
this so are you sort of in the folks
that are on boarding for the
entertainment realm into the polka dot
ecosystem how far along are they at in
that process and I don't mean to
necessarily single out polka dot but
maybe this is just representative for
teams that are building for
entertainment on blockchain right now
are they solving the problem of
abstracting away these complex processes
that you and I other crypto natives are
willing to to do in order to to own an
nft or are we also similar to you were
just talking about with the web 3 um and
gaming space we're still kind of a few
years away from like the masses being
able to swap in G items for for eth I
and so I think we've made huge progress
in the last two years or so on this um
like being able you know like mostly po
up perspective now but but you know I
know I know there's efforts in in all
kinds of places around this but being
able to like you know you don't actually
need uh the native token to do the
transaction on the network you don't
actually need to download the wallet
like you take something like mythical
game I mean you can download the app
right now on on the App Store and start
playing it and you don't really know you
know that there's like polka dot in the
background you also don't need to know
um and so uh you know that's that's I
think where where where the journey is
going and I think we really have if not
all really most of the tools in our hand
I also think there's a lot more we can
do on the actually on the application
layer rather than on the protocol layer
like if you I don't know if you uh you
you know you trade some in-game item and
maybe it does take you know a few
seconds or whatever like for this
transaction to finalize on the network
um but as a user you don't have to show
that to the user right like it doesn't
matter for the user that this is what's
going on at the background um and so
there's there's things like that right
where you can also uh maybe some of the
transactions will be slower than it
being sort of like on some centralized
back end but uh uh there's just no if
you're smart enough about it you can
give a user pretty much the same
experience so um yeah there there's
different levels to it for sure but I
but I do think we're much closer now
than than we've ever currently there's a
lot of tribalism when it comes to like a
blockchain network and token holders and
they love their tokens and they're going
to fight till the end of days and this
world that you're just describing it's
going to be very um chain agnostic at
the end of the day when the end user the
Normie my mom like someone doesn't know
that they're even using blockchain on
the back end what happens then in that
future are we like is this multi-chain
thesis really going to play out are
blockchains going to have name
recognition when they can be easily
swapped um for the on the back end from
any front-end uh application like what
happens to the Diehard token holder and
their love for the blockchain in that
future yeah look I think I think we'll
just have different user groups of these
of these platforms like we will have
people who really invest in the token
right and are therefore invested in its
in its future and have an opinion on it
and polka do through that also get you
know significant governance rights to
like talk about how the future of the
network really should be looking like um
but you will also have people that are
just interested in some form of end user
application and want to use that and are
really that interested or invested in in
in how how the platform underneath is
going to look like and I think certain
use cases uh you know lend themselves
more for one or or or the other or will
have more user groups in in one category
or in the other uh but yeah I I do think
you can build games where the underlying
platform really doesn't doesn't matter
all that much and you know most people
will not care about this success of the
back end um uh versus you know if you go
for example in def5 where it's a lot
about uh yield and locking toen up and
so on and you almost never are able to
get around the fact of holding the most
liquid asset in that ecosystem or the
highest market cap asset in that EOS is
just offer the Bas or token H and
therefore you're like automatically
invested and you know me like if those
use cases are much closer to uh you
being you caring about sort of like the
underlying the underlying thing you're
also usually much more Crypton native uh
so yeah I think we we we'll just have
different uh different user groups and I
think that will also speak to to
maturity of the tech yeah yeah I
appreciate that um perspective cuz you
know it's like the internet not
everybody uses it for the same reason um
and I kind of want to use this
opportunity to to jump into some drama
that the polka dot ecosystem witnessed
in summer of
2024 um so basically like a lot of the
broader crypto Community was up in arms
because a transparency report from the
polka dot ecosystem came out about how
uh governance played a huge role in in
uh polka dot. token holders uh basically
voting to fund a wide variety of
marketing initiatives to the tune of
like approximately $37 million or or
five million dot um the specific numbers
might be a little bit higher or lower
but basically the community voted on
ways to market the polka dot ecosystem
and that went to a lot of kol's it went
to podcast hosts I listen to Unchained
by Laura Shin all the time
um and she's you know doing polka dot
advertisements on her show so there was
just like a marketing spend that was
Community approved and there was a huge
backlash because it you know was a
splashy amount of number um so what the
heck happened like how did the community
vote on this and then all of the sudden
when the transparency report came out
everybody was up in arms yeah okay so uh
I I thoughts as you can imagine on on
the thing um uh so there's a couple of
things maybe to uh clarify before we
before we jump into sort of like my my
opinion on it uh so one is uh it's
important to understand how the polka
dot how governance Works in polka dot
right so polka dot from the start we've
taken a very strong stance stronger than
really any any any other blockchain
Network on on chain governance right we
said okay we don't you know govern
govern there always going to be some
governance going on uh you know whether
that's in B rooms or it's like four
course and Bitcoin or whatever or
whether it's formalized on chain right
so might as well bring it into the open
really sort of like if we anyways have
like this Global coordination just still
might as well use it to govern the
system itself right um and you Le very
hard into that right so polka dot um you
can polka dot really can upgrade itself
and it's really unique in that like if
you want to change the PO protocol
itself uh you s like register piece of
code on there everyone votes on it and
then automatically onchain en forcibly
the system just upgrades itself to that
code right there's no coordination of
like people need to upgrade their NS or
whatever like it's it's really sort of
like it's a self- evolving living
mechanism if you want is the PO now
another piece of that governance system
is an onchain down like what they call
the treasury right sort of like it's a a
part of the of the part of the the Dodge
token economy includes some uh uh sort
of like Revenue going or some money
going some Dodge going into a pot that
the community can vote on and can
distribute for things that they think
are important so this is the element
we're talking about right
and towards the end of last year um
internally in the foundation we started
to talk about ah we think like spending
there is not really going in the
direction we we've been well reasonably
hands off we were like this is the
community we have our own money the
we do things we think it's all good for
for f and they you know the community
can do take it what they want to take it
like be uh do more out there things like
that we wouldn't fund you know it's
generally a good sort of like split of
responsibilities toward was the end of
last year we're like ah we think it's
getting a little bit out of hand right
uh let's um uh let's do we we start a
couple of things we don't have to go
into into all the missions we we started
but one of the things we we've done is
fund a group called open go.at ESS and
like secretaries of the Polkka dot
government system if you want and part
of what they were supposed to do is like
write these transparency reports uh to
inform the community around spending and
budgeting considerations and what's you
know where things should be going now
that that report was put out there and
put like written specifically in a spicy
manner to like you know get become a
meme in pokka do like get get viral into
the Polkka dot community and it it went
so viral that it s like escaped the
polka do bubble and you know like
suddenly everyone was talking about this
thing right but it's really like you
know it's sort of like the guy in the
bicycle with a s in his own like it's
it's funded by us we wanted to be out
there like we wanted to have that
conversation because we thought it's
important conversation to have um so
this is it's not like we learned
something when the stuff went through
through no really no one in the Poo
Community learned something that didn't
know before but okay the the overarching
crypto industry Le which might be good
as well um but you know I think there
the the it's not like a poker treasury
is going to run out of money in two
years or something like that there's
currently like a big buffer in there and
we've seen a reduction of that um but
there's continuous inflows going in
obviously polka dot is not running out
of money because the foundation sits on
tons of cash and other the crypto and
and whatnot to fund things right there's
other funding resources than than this
market right so like a lot of the like
headlin of like Po running out of money
in like whatever two years is they're
nonsense but um uh this this treasury uh
you know approach to treasury having to
be more uh sustainable and with a bit
more thought that's that's definitely
real and like I said something I I very
much agree with and I would like to see
changing I think you know if you also
look at the poker community in southeast
fence uh there's really uh a you know a
group of sort of like more more activist
investors who are really keen on
marketing and more out there marketing
uh but there's a political Spectrum in
po artist people with other opinions in
particular a lot of people on the
Builder side who are much more
interested in more Grassroots botom M
developer Community kind of stuff rather
than you know the Pok logo on some on
some billboard right I personally think
like especially a lot of the like more
out there like sponsoring stuff or just
slapping a logo on something without a
call to action is not particularly good
not particularly sensible right um it's
fine if that happens here and there it's
fine if you know if the if the if the
is the on duns marketing activities in
general like for example a lot of the
Pok events around the world are funded
through this bucket of money and then I
think it's the right approach uh but
yeah I uh there's other things that have
been part of this uh whatever 30 million
spend uh that uh you know us not having
done it through the foundation tells you
I think how you know how we think about
it uh so uh yeah there there one the
core core truth here um there's maybe
one more element I would say which is
some of those numbers are of course also
overblown because they just look at when
was the money committed and not when was
the money spent or when was the activity
actually you know a lot of these
activities actually run for a year or
longer like it's it's not yeah anyways
you can slice those numbers up uh
differin and they look much less severe
uh but at maybe more of a sight note uh
yeah uh that's that's that's I think uh
so I can see the on on to well I think
there's two things here um first like
aren't we in an Innovative Cutting Edge
you know new way of hurting cats and
just bringing people together with
decentralized peer-to-peer networks and
if we're going to be experimenting like
what Bitcoin and ethereum and polka dot
and every other cryptocurrency and
blockchain network out there is aren't
we going to break some eggs if we want
to make an omelet um and this was an
experiment in uh onchain governance and
frankly allowing uh community members to
have an opportunity in the say of how a
treasury is spent um I spend a lot of my
times in the Neo ecosystem which is an
OG blockchain from 2015 and marketing is
a huge problem that a lot of token
holders have they want to see the
foundation shill more they want to see
more uh marketing initiatives that maybe
a a company wouldn't necessarily do
because it doesn't make any sense and so
to give that kind of power to the treas
y voters um I think it's uh I I think it
was an amazing experiment and like you
know maybe uh the numbers are a little
bit bloated but like they got to throw a
little bit of money around and and and
ways that they felt would be the right
way to spend it and um you know whether
the experiment was a success or not um
who knows they say that any press is
good press and and here we are talking
about polka dot I heard a lot of people
that hadn't been talking about polka dot
last year talking about it during this
moment of drama um bringing up the
ecosystem the onchain treasury and it
also opened up an opportunity to talk
about the differences between the
treasury and the funding of web3
foundation the the true entity task with
really focusing on building out the
architecture and supporting the Builders
of the ecosystem so I thought it was uh
kind of some spicy drama that was really
kind of invigorating even though like
you guys might have had to deal with
people throwing poop on your house
whatever uh and secondly um I was at
consensus and uh I went to the polka dot
Afterparty and it was by far probably
the coolest party I went to at that
event and Beyond just kind of like yeah
it was fun people were listening to to
fun music and dancing or whatever uh
there were two things that really stuck
out I got to see the polka dot logo on
uh an indie racing car which was super
cool uh my girlfriend and I are are fans
of F1 so it was really nice to see like
an indie car in real life it was a nice
opportunity for me to share a photo with
her and say hey look at me hanging out
with my crypto D genen friends uh by the
way here's a car we both love and
secondly I got to see a really cool use
case of uh blockchain technology and new
Cutting Edge Innovative technology being
used for a real world kind of
opportunity and when I went to the party
I onboarded um I I connected a credit
card to a wristband that I could use to
buy drinks and to uh participate in like
a game that was being played for
everybody at the event so there was also
a really cool way for showing party
goers some of the awesome things that
are happening in terms of like fals and
onboarding you know normal users through
uh traditional rails such as credit
cards to do something as simple as
purchase a drink but like that party was
funded from the treasury and and we got
to use some really cool technology we
got to interact with a blockchain
community in a way that we normally
didn't get to so I think like despite
the fact that there were a lot of people
up in arms and they were mad at kol's
getting uh whatever amount of money um
it was really cool to kind of like see
these initiatives play out in the real
world so at the end of the day you kind
of alluded to this but sure there was
some negativity but like is all
marketing good or bad still good
marketing yeah I mean look the marketing
Works uh but maybe in an unattended way
for sure um but I will also say like
it's exactly the the conversation I
wanted to have I just would have liked
to have it with the Pol Community with
people who already know how this
mechanism works and how the system works
and hey who can put that conversation
into the right context right uh and you
know unfortunately unfortunately
whenever we had the conversation with
all kinds of people that have all kinds
of opinions about marketing you know
without without being able to like place
it precisely uh into something
constructive right uh but yeah the
second point maybe here like the you
know the the the the polka do after
party I assume it's like the bash party
like it's exactly yeah exactly it's
exactly the kind of like entertainment
uh focus groups that we have in the Pok
ecosystem right that both think about um
uh sort of like how to onboard users
like how to really you know have
something that is that actually is is
tangible you use the technology but also
and this is I think the nice thing of a
lot of this entertainment stuff is like
you also get Good Vibes right they they
are able to like throw 40 around and
have a race car there and so on right
like and this is also something that I
is quite nice with generally the the
vertical of of entertainment uh it works
a lot on of of Aesthetics and usability
and and and and is usually something
that's very approachable to to to anyone
um so it's a it's a good vertical to
have an all ecosystem for sure yeah I
got to admit like the The Bash party
wasn't even on my radar I was walking
home um from another party and a group
of devs with beers in their hands walked
up and they're like ah we're going to
the bash party you should come and
they're like polka dot throws the best
parties and I was like okay that's cool
and one of a lot of fun I had when I was
there was there was this projector that
was shooting a racing game onto the wall
and you could just walk up um go to the
website add the kind of like code the
invite code um for that event and then
anybody at the event could basically
like not bet with money but like bet on
who which digital racing C they thought
was going to win and that was just a
super cool kind of like way to bring
people together and to chat um I've
never seen kind of like an interactive
immersive simple game like that that
allowed everybody to kind of participate
if they just walk up and and the
onboarding process was super simple and
smooth so yeah I mean like I randomly
heard about the party and then I was
using technologies that were probably
being incubated within the ecosystem by
web3 Foundation possibly even from the
treasury so um yeah it was a really cool
event I guess um like for the web 3
foundation's perspective like what was
the the main lesson learned did you put
like Reigns on the treasury and you're
like okay dot holders like we're not
going to spend you know tens of millions
of dollars on what you think is right
anymore maybe we'll like curb your
allowance yeah it's more we uh there's a
couple of things uh we're we're doing uh
so like one is uh there's actually a bit
of an overhaul of the economic system in
polka do in general like it simplifies
the onchip processes around like you
know high how high is inflation and
inflation is going to come down H how
how is the treasury how much money is
treasury getting and this going to be
easier to sort of like uh understand how
much do is actually coming in every
month and therefore it's easier to have
a treasury budgeting conversation around
that uh we furthering further doubling
down on essentially the efforts that
started this conversation like hey how
should budgets look like how should
spending categories look like and so on
um we've also launched a program uh this
s a couple of months ago but we're sort
of like also doubling down on that where
you know as a foundation we're not um
like it is sort of like Community voting
but we do have a program where people
that want to uh you know that have a
very clear sort of like political agenda
and uh public about that and are willing
to S of like part stream these prop and
be good actors in in a government
conversation and vote on these proposals
and so on WE equip them with with
Foundation voting power right um and so
uh it allows us to let's say sort of
like elect Community representation of
uh of the of our vote out there and um
you know this
helps you know with without us of like
just coming in and like overruling all
of the votes it just helps shaping
certain convers a but it also just helps
raising the standard of conversation
right we don't want to PR each other we
don't want to harass each other we want
to be nice and we want to be productive
and so on and we can support people who
stand for that so um uh this was all on
like sort of small for similar category
but you know we really want to instead
of to like you know let's press a pause
button on all of it uh we want to take
the right learnings and improves the
mechanisms and and the tools and the
social layer around it uh that you know
it can work better and there's maybe one
last Point here which is around
expectation benefit even the the the the
the most well-governed entities in the
world right if you look at nation states
or or public companies you should expect
some governance drama like governance
and drama are always go hand in hand you
know unless you say you know you there's
really one person who makes all of the
decisions and we trust that person that
person is great right which is a totally
fine model right I think all most
private companies uh you know run well
in like voluntary dictatorships but um
polka dot as a community is now so
pluralistic and obviously also in the E
of of decentralization that we want to
have some form of more advanced U
formalized governance system and that
will come with some amount of
disagreement and you know disagreement
gets too unproductive I guess we'll call
it drama but uh uh yeah we want to
minimize that we we don't have the
expect of it to like fully disappear for
for for forever look governance is hard
and I think any Dow that has an issue
with um people participating in onchain
governance and then facing backlash from
those uh decisions kind of being acted
on ultimately I think that's a good
problem to have and I think a lot of
dows out there who have seen diminished
onchain activity and diminished
participation would love to have one of
these good problems so um maybe kind of
like zooming out from the bottom up and
and the disagreements in how uh the
funds were spent maybe we can talk a
little bit as we wrap up about the top
down perspective um I'm always curious
to hear how foundations view grants and
distributing grant funding to teams that
they view as being worthy of being
invested in and so uh decentralized
Futures is um G has gone through its 202
w or is it just called wave 22 of Grant
distributions yeah okay so those are two
different programs but yeah it's going
to lead us I think nicely into a
conversation on how we think about this
going forward but yeah so there's
there's a traditional grants program in
the foundation which is uh in its 2
second wave or whatever because it's
running since 207 uh and then there's a
separate program called decentralized
Futures which is uh much more I think
encompasses our future vision of funding
and we're probably going to roll these
things up into into into one program uh
compl this year um but yeah exactly so
traditional grants is really going on
for a very long time it's essentially
you know uh you want to build a certain
kind of tool in in an open source world
uh you you know a couple milestones and
how to get there you send us in those
Milestones or have them some more get up
we check them we pay you out and and and
off we go desized Futures is much more
flexible right it's much more like I
said more the vision I think uh how I
think about grants and I think how how
Foundation should be thinking about
grants is you know it's fine that you've
convinced us that building this
technical tool is a good idea right but
is is uh you know the rate limiting
factor for Pok success is that really
like more technical Milestone
achievements probably not right I think
really what we want is we want to give
people the best starting conditions to
uh uh build businesses to uh you know
really go into a self- sustained world
in in the in in the PO ecosystem right
convince someone other than the
foundation uh like investors users uh
customers that what they're doing is a
great idea and we're here to give you
really good starting conditions to do
that that could be via a grant could be
VI an investment it could be by becoming
a first customer right um but it's uh us
getting you started and then you live
off our balance sheet for the rest of
time is for for the most most
initiatives the is not a great model
right and so in Grants uh we we'll
always be paying out grants it's just
much more flexible H in how we C can
fund people and you know a what does a
grand really say you say you do the work
first and then on the basis of a
milestone you have a payout condition
you get the money uh but what about
Investments right like uh you know you
get the money up front uh but we get a
little bit of ownership and therefore
alignment around what you what you're
doing here um and so we just uh whatever
two weeks ago so uh announced a new uh
po ecosystem funds that that we're
involved in that's really just dedicated
for investment but we really think about
more holistically in terms of funding
like someone needs dollars in their
account right okay let's look at it
right rather than here's a gr program
with very you know very static sort of
like requirements and and we push people
through those steps yeah you kind of
like said two things that perked my ears
there um I think one of the things with
kind of ecosystems that are falling off
of the radar is that there's not
necessarily like a VC Pipeline and what
I necessarily mean by that is once a
project has been Grant funded to build
there's no like skin in the game for the
underlying Foundation or Eco growth team
or whatever you call it to really kind
of like keep that team's feet to the
fire to provide them with further
resources to grow expand uh onboard new
users whatever and when like the
foundation kind of has skin in the game
they have token allocation that really
provides like a new and unique incentive
model that I think can be symbiotic um
using economic incentives so a that's
super uh cool to hear about and I'll
definitely be like excited to see how
this plays out in the future but then
secondly I think if you also look at the
way in which the grants program
distributes grant funding on the most
recent wave 22 article um you can see
that there's a breakdown in the teams
and the projects that were distributed
Grant to uh grants to and I'm part of a
community funding Dow and we're always
focused on Tech what's the DAP that can
be built what's the dev that can be
onboarded but like if you look at the
breakdown you see there's marketing
there's BD and then there's also Tech so
what are kind of like the lessons
learned over the years that the the team
has kind of gleaned and decided that
there should also be marketing
initiatives and BD initiatives that are
also funded by grants and maybe what are
some of like the lessons learned the
pros and cons of providing funding to
like a TV team or a marketing team in
conjunction with also like Tech and Deb
Builders yeah totally so I I think um
you know I mean one thing I would say on
the tech side is that you know Tech uh
Tech is only valuable if it's useful to
someone right and so um we have much
more of an eye on uh you know what I was
saying earlier is like hey how is this
going to like contribute to to to
someone goals right like how is this
actually a tool that enables someone to
do something and how much interest is on
the other side for something like this
there's a lot of stuff that like sounds
good and sounds smart in like a onepage
document or like a presentation but you
know where it doesn't mean anyone really
needs it um so that's one thing I think
the other thing with uh sort of like BD
and marketing and so on initiatives is
like there's like one thing we've seen
quite strongly in a Pok ecosystem is
that there sort of like sub groups sub
ecosystems sub verticals that are
emerging right and so there are groups
that are um you know very passionate
about uh the success of the of the defi
ecosystem within polka dot or the
success of the gaming ecosystem in polka
dot and uh their interests are broadly
aligned right these two groups like they
want to use suest on polka dot they want
to see po be suful and so but the kinds
of initiatives they're driving are quite
different and the kind of expertise you
have to have to to to uh to drive those
uh vertical forward is quite different
and so we're much more interested in
funding people that you know let's say
dubd or or you know suable fund or
whatever it like with a with that'll
very close to the kind of industry and
the kind of vertical that TR to make
successful um because you know it's just
there's going to be smaller teams more
Nimble teams teams with higher expertise
teams that are much more entrepreneurial
rather than um uh you know I think the
most extreme version of that is if you
go way back to like ethereum lad when
you had consensus with like 1,500
employees doing everything eum right um
and and and we SE much more of a model
for etherum emerge after the big layers
of consensus where like a lot of these
people that get laid off sort their
individual organization and companies
and so on in eum land that then ended up
being being usually successful and and
and you know are now of from the
underpinnings of sort of like ethereum
infrastructure and daps and so on so uh
you know this is much more what you see
the Pol ecosystem now as well happening
um and so natur we lean into that in the
foundation also with our funding
strategy right we do fund people that do
BD marketing or ecosyst development type
activities uh along the lines of of
areas of interest uh uh rather than just
having it all inhouse and driving it at
some generic way well Fabian we just
touched on a topic that I would love to
go for another half hour on but in the
interest of your time and and respecting
it I think beer at the next bash party
yeah yes absolutely um I think with all
that said uh we'll just kind of end this
here um definitely opens the door for
round two uh over beer or maybe even
over the mic sometime in the future um
but anyone who's listened to this who's
a Dev who is an interested token holder
whatever what's the best way that they
can reach out to you in the web 3
Foundation yeah look I mean you can uh
find me on Twitter Twitter like saan G
is my first and my last name uh the MS
are open uh if you want to learn about
the web Foundation it's just web3 do
foundation and then everything polka dot
uh is uh the polka dot Network on on
Twitter on all social accounts uh or or
on the website uh so there's a new
website that she's just launching this
week so it's definitely a good place to
check out um yeah awesome thank you so
much for for taking the time to join us
in the smart economy podcast I had a
blast in this conversation it this was
fun thanks so much Dylan cheers well
what did you think of that conversation
I thought it was fascinating to hear
more about fabian's perspective Ive on
how a foundation can support Grassroots
teams but also projects that want to
build sustainable blockchain businesses
was also interesting to hear more about
the lessons learned and his thoughts on
how Community governments can dictate
the direction of an onchain Treasury and
it was just really cool to talk with
Fabian about the emerging verticals in
the web 3 space how they've evolved over
the years and the growth that's still
ahead of us to keep up to date with to
keep up to date with the podcast head
over to
www.smart eony podcast.com and if you
like the guests that we've had on the
show please consider showing your
support by rating and reviewing the show
on your favorite podcasting platform
every rate review like and subscription
really helps us get in front of more
ears and eyes and of course if you're a
Neo token holder please consider voting
for Neo news today as your Council
representative we have proudly been
serving the Neo ecosystem since 2017 and
we'll continue to do so by putting
portions of our Council rewards directly
back into ecosystem growth initiatives
so with all of that said thank you so
much for taking the time to listen to
the smart economy podcast and we look
forward to catching you next time thanks
team I appreciate you